##Metadata Requirements

###Service Provider and Matching Service Metadata

####SAML Metadata

Service Providers and matching services will be required to provide
content equivalent to standard SAML metadata elements to describe the
keys, endpoints and contact details required by their services and for
operation with the hub service. This metadata SHOULD be provided out of
band via methods described in the GOV.UK Verify on-boarding guide.

Service Provider Metadata will include keys, endpoints and contact
elements defined in standard SAML metadata.

####Additional Metadata

Service Providers MUST provide additional metadata required for
connection to the hub service including Level of Assurance requirements,
and matching requirements (endpoints and process steps).

This additional service provider metadata will be gathered out-of-band
and will be specified in the GOV.UK Verify on-boarding guide.

###IDP Metadata

####SAML Metadata

Identity Providers will be required to provide content equivalent to
standard SAML metadata elements to describe the keys, endpoints and
contact details required for operation with the hub service. This
metadata SHOULD be provided out of band via methods described in the
GOV.UK Verify IDP on-boarding documentation.

Identity Provider Metadata will include keys, endpoints and contact
elements defined in standard SAML metadata.

####Additional Metadata

Identity Providers MUST provide additional metadata required for
connection to the hub service such as user interface elements and
instructional text for the hub IDP selection process.

This additional identity provider metadata will be gathered out-of-band
and will be specified in the GOV.UK Verify on-boarding guide.

###Federation Metadata

The hub service MUST host a SAML metadata document, known as the
federation metadata, that describes the identity providers and the hub
service as SAML entities using `<EntityDescriptor>` elements.

The hub service MUST be described using a `<SPSSODescriptor>` with its
signing and encryption certificates described in `<KeyDescriptor>`
elements.

Each identity provider MUST be described using a `<IDPSSODescriptor>`
with its signing certificate described in a `<KeyDescriptor>` element.

All service providers, matching services, identity providers, and the
hub service MUST regularly consume the federation metadata so that they
have up to date metadata for the entities that they communicate with.
